C# 7.x: enhanced generic constraints (#244)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/classes.md

The list of constraints given in a `where` clause can include any of the following components, in this order: a single primary constraint, one or more secondary constraints, and the constructor constraint, `new()`.

> A primary constraint can be a class type, the ***reference type constraint*** `class`, the ***value type constraint*** `struct`, or the ***unmanaged type constraint*** `unmanaged`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A primary constraint can be a class type, the ***reference type constraint*** `class`, the ***value type constraint*** `struct`, or the ***unmanaged type constraint*** `unmanaged`.
```

A secondary constraint can be a *type_parameter* or *interface_type*.

The reference type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a reference type. All class types, interface types, delegate types, array types, and type parameters known to be a reference type (as defined below) satisfy this constraint.

The value type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a non-nullable value type. All non-nullable struct types, enum types, and type parameters having the value type constraint satisfy this constraint. Note that although classified as a value type, a nullable value type ([§8.3.11](types.md#8311-nullable-value-types)) does not satisfy the value type constraint. A type parameter having the value type constraint shall not also have the *constructor_constraint*, although it may be used as a type argument for another type parameter with a *constructor_constraint*.

> *Note*: The `System.Nullable<T>` type specifies the non-nullable value type constraint for `T`. Thus, recursively constructed types of the forms `T??` and `Nullable<Nullable<T>>` are prohibited. *end note*

> The token `unmanaged` is neither a keyword nor a contextual keyword. When it is encountered, it will either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The token `unmanaged` is neither a keyword nor a contextual keyword. When it is encountered, it will either:

```

- Bind to a type named `unmanaged`
- Bind to no type, in which case, it is interpreted as the unmanaged type constraint.

The unmanaged type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a non-nullable unmanaged type.

> Pointer types are never allowed to be type arguments and are not considered to satisfy either the `reference` type or `value` type constraints.

Reviewer 2: `` `reference` `` and `` `value` `` markup seems inappropriate here because, unlike `unmanaged`, those words do not have specific meanings in C# source code.

Reviewer 3: I think those are both typos, also doesn't `unmanaged` need to be added? So we get:

> Pointer types are never allowed to be type arguments and are not considered to satisfy either the `class` type, `struct`, or `unmanaged` type constraints.

Reviewer 4: I agree that it should say `class` and `struct`, but as pointers are unmanaged types, Nigel's suggestion reads a little oddly. How about something like:

> Pointer types are never allowed to be type arguments, and don't satisfy any type constraints, even `unmanaged`, despite being unmanaged types.

Author: On the TG2 call of 2023-02-01, we agreed with this approach.

A secondary constraint can be a *type_parameter* or *interface_type*.

The reference type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a reference type. All class types, interface types, delegate types, array types, and type parameters known to be a reference type (as defined below) satisfy this constraint.

The value type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a non-nullable value type. All non-nullable struct types, enum types, and type parameters having the value type constraint satisfy this constraint. Note that although classified as a value type, a nullable value type ([§8.3.11](types.md#8311-nullable-value-types)) does not satisfy the value type constraint. A type parameter having the value type constraint shall not also have the *constructor_constraint*, although it may be used as a type argument for another type parameter with a *constructor_constraint*.

> *Note*: The `System.Nullable<T>` type specifies the non-nullable value type constraint for `T`. Thus, recursively constructed types of the forms `T??` and `Nullable<Nullable<T>>` are prohibited. *end note*

> The token `unmanaged` is neither a keyword nor a contextual keyword. When it is encountered, it will either:

Reviewer 3: This might be inconsistent with the approach taken for `nameof` (§11.7.20) which is a contextual keyword (§6.4.4) and hence an *identifier* (§6.4.3) – this might stem from different ways the MS docs and the Standard spec contextual keywords and identifiers.

If we follow the approach for `nameof` then `unmanaged` would be added as an alternative to `contextual_keyword` and lines 426-429 could be replaced by a paragraph echoing the one for resolving `nameof` in §11.7.20, e.g. (written by copying the `nameof` para and editing it!):

> Because `unmanaged` is not a keyword, in *primary_constraint* the unmanaged constraint is always syntactically ambiguous with *class_type*. For compatibility reasons, if a name lookup (§11.7.4) of the name `unmanaged` succeeds it is treated as a `class_type`. Otherwise it is treated as the unmanaged constraint.

Reviewer 4: Agreed - this is also similar to `var` (and `dynamic`, although I now can't see where that's actually specified).

It definitely sounds like the description in https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/draft-v7/standard/lexical-structure.md#644-keywords - if there's a reason why it's *not* a contextual keyword, I'd like to hear it and we can include that in the standard.

Reviewer 3: As contextual keywords are just a subset of identifiers I can see no reason why `unmanaged` should not be one.

- Bind to a type named `unmanaged`
- Bind to no type, in which case, it is interpreted as the unmanaged type constraint.

The unmanaged type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a non-nullable unmanaged type.

Pointer types are never allowed to be type arguments and are not considered to satisfy either the `reference` type or `value` type constraints.

If a constraint is a class type, an interface type, or a type parameter, that type specifies a minimal “base type” that every type argument used for that type parameter shall support. Whenever a constructed type or generic method is used, the type argument is checked against the constraints on the type parameter at compile-time. The type argument supplied shall satisfy the conditions described in [§8.4.5](types.md#845-satisfying-constraints).

A *class_type* constraint shall satisfy the following rules:

- The type shall be a class type.
- The type shall not be `sealed`.

> - The type shall not be one of the following types: `System.Array` or `System.ValueType`.

Reviewer 3: Do we highlight anywhere that `System.Delegate` and `System.Enum` are now allowed (as of v7.3)? Should we? (It seems a notable change from v<7.3)

Reviewer 4: It would be good to include it in a list of changes since v6, but I don't think the relaxation warrants any other highlighting.

Author: On the TG2 call of 2023-02-01, Rex will add this to the list of "what's new in V7."

Author: Done!

A secondary constraint can be a *type_parameter* or *interface_type*.

The reference type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a reference type. All class types, interface types, delegate types, array types, and type parameters known to be a reference type (as defined below) satisfy this constraint.

The value type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a non-nullable value type. All non-nullable struct types, enum types, and type parameters having the value type constraint satisfy this constraint. Note that although classified as a value type, a nullable value type ([§8.3.11](types.md#8311-nullable-value-types)) does not satisfy the value type constraint. A type parameter having the value type constraint shall not also have the *constructor_constraint*, although it may be used as a type argument for another type parameter with a *constructor_constraint*.

> *Note*: The `System.Nullable<T>` type specifies the non-nullable value type constraint for `T`. Thus, recursively constructed types of the forms `T??` and `Nullable<Nullable<T>>` are prohibited. *end note*

> The token `unmanaged` is neither a keyword nor a contextual keyword. When it is encountered, it will either:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because `unmanaged` is not a keyword, in *primary_constraint* the unmanaged constraint is always syntactically ambiguous with *class_type*. For compatibility reasons, if a name lookup (§11.7.4) of the name `unmanaged` succeeds it is treated as a `class_type`. Otherwise it is treated as the unmanaged constraint.
```

The following suggestions to delete lines 446-448 are part of this, but are not included in the review for some reason...

Author: In the TG2 call, we agreed to Nigel's 4-part change.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> - Bind to a type named `unmanaged`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> - Bind to no type, in which case, it is interpreted as the unmanaged type constraint.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> The unmanaged type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a non-nullable unmanaged type.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The unmanaged type constraint specifies that a type argument used for the type parameter shall be a non-nullable unmanaged type ([§8.8](types.md#88-unmanaged-types)).
```

> Pointer types are never allowed to be type arguments and are not considered to satisfy either the `reference` type or `value` type constraints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pointer types are never allowed to be type arguments, and don't satisfy any type constraints, even unmanaged, despite being unmanaged types.
```

If the `where` clause for a type parameter includes a constructor constraint (which has the form `new()`), it is possible to use the `new` operator to create instances of the type ([§11.7.15.2](expressions.md#117152-object-creation-expressions)). Any type argument used for a type parameter with a constructor constraint shall be a value type, a non-abstract class having a public parameterless constructor, or a type parameter having the value type constraint or constructor constraint.

It is a compile-time error for *type_parameter_constraints* having a *primary_constraint* of `struct` or `unmanaged` to also have a *constructor_constraint*.

> 
> It is a compile-time error for *type_parameter_constraints* having a *primary_constraint* of `unmanaged` to also have a *constructor_constraint*.

Reviewer: delete these:

```suggestion
```

> It is a compile-time error for *type_parameter_constraints* having a *primary_constraint* of `struct` to also have a *constructor_constraint*.

Reviewer 3: The following added line is a bit repetitious, maybe:

```suggestion
It is a compile-time error for *type_parameter_constraints* having a *primary_constraint* of `struct` or `unmanaged` to also have a *constructor_constraint*.
```

and deleted the added line?

Author: ON the TG2 call of 2023-02-01, we agreed to this.
